“We know that the self is constructed because it can be so easily deconstructed through damage, disease and drugs. It must be an emergent property of a parallel system processing input, output and internal representations. It is an illusion because it feels so real, but that experience is not what it seems. The same is true for free will. Although we can experience the mental anguish of making a decision, our free will cannot be some kind of King Solomon in our mind weighing up the pros and cons as this would present the problem of logical infinite regress (who is inside their head and so on?). The choices and decisions we make are based on situations that impose on us. We do not have the free will to choose the experiences that have shaped our decisions.”

—Bruce Hood



“We were talking about the effort against global warming. One of his points is that far, far too much climate scientists and their liberal political allies communicate about climate change aggressively and derisively, which simply does not work. Adults really do not like the sensation that they’re being educated by another adult, particularly one that attacks their various communal and affinity groups. So the question becomes, do you care enough about slowing global warming to drop the psychically satisfying routine of ridiculing people with whom you disagree?

[…]

Let me assure you of something: no one, in the history of persuasion, has ever been persuaded by someone indignantly ordering them to educate themselves. Telling people to educate themselves in that manner is essentially ensuring that they won’t. At some point you have to decide if you’re more invested in the fun of feeling righteously superior or the actual need to convince others.”

—Fredrik deBoer


“10% of people will never steal, 10% of people will always steal, and for everyone else … it depends.

The “it depends” part is crucial to understanding human nature, and that’s what Ariely spends most of the book examining in various tests. If for most people, honesty depends, what exactly does it depend on? The experiments Ariely conducts prove again and again that most people will consistently and reliably cheat “just a little”, to the extent that they can still consider themselves honest people. The gating factor isn’t laws, penalties, or ethics. Surprisingly, that stuff has virtually no effect on behavior. What does, though, is whether they can personally still feel like they are honest people.

This is because they don’t even consider it cheating – they’re just taking a little extra, giving themselves a tiny break, enjoying a minor boost, because well, haven’t they been working extra specially hard lately and earned it? Don’t they of all people deserve something nice once in a while, and who would even miss this tiny amount? There’s so much!

These little white lies are the path of least resistance. They are everywhere. If laws don’t work, if ethics classes don’t work, if severe penalties don’t work, how do you encourage people to behave in a way that “feels” honest that is actually, you know, honest?
[…]
That’s the good news: a simple reminder at the time of the temptation is usually all it takes for people to suddenly “remember” their honesty.

The bad news is Clippy was right.” —Jeff Atwood


“My feeling of meaningfulness has always been varying widely. If I am on a low, I am deeply fed up with everything. It is like being nauseated with life itself. Then I say that I am “tired”, but I am not really tired, I just notice that everything seems like an effort, and interpret this as tiredness. But what I really mean is my actions or inactions seem meaningless to me, even cooking dinner, and consequently everything seems like a chore. For me, that is the summary of how depression feels like: like pervasive meaninglessness. I usually still function, but it is against a tide of nothingness… this impression of meaning has no rational thought process behind it. It is just a feeling that my actions have meaning or a feeling that they don’t. I know that my actions are always meaningless in the grand scheme of things and always meaningful for myself and the people around me. I suspect a lot of things that have always puzzled me about other people, and how stable they seem, is that they have a less varying sense of meaningfulness.” —Zinemin
